#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding latin1
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Section

Next generation conceptmaps
\layout Standard

In conzilla conceptmaps have been graphical presentations of non visual
 graphs of information.
 The non visual graph strongly resembles the semantic web and our intention
 is to move in that direction.
 I.e.
 we will soon start use RDF as our base format where some basic scheemas
 will provide the type information.
 Hence we need a way to visualize RDF graphs.
 Automatic layout may be interesting from some perspectives but semautomatic
 or strictly human layout will continue to be important.
 Hence the future of conceptmaps will be to provide grouping and placement
 information as well as mapping types to graphical styles.
 The question that arises is how theese conceptmaps should be represented.
 Starting with stating some demands may help us choose:
\layout Description

Grouping certain parts should remain stuck together when imported or moved,
 relative positioning is clearly wanted.
\layout Description

Stylesheeting should be possible, i.e.
 color information and such should be depend on type and maybe even expressed
 in RDF.
 Stylesheeting information should be possible to override by having a local
 stylesheet with higher priority.
\layout Description

Interactivity should be possible to define deviations from standard behaviour,
 such as controlling popups or spreading of mark.
\layout Description

Extensionability a conceptmap should be able to have a revision history
 and different extensions may coexist without ever being merged.
\layout Description

Annotationability extensions in the form of personal annotations, i.e.
 metadata about layout.
\layout Subsection

The role of SVG
\layout Standard

Expressing conceptmaps in SVG directly doesn't fullfill the extensionalbility
 and annotationability demands without using powerful techniques such as
 XLink and XSLT.
 However using it to describe how certain types should be rendered need
 not be hindered by the demands above, even better it's a close match since
 SVG is constructed to support reuse.
 (I.e.
 a relation of the type 
\emph on 
generalization
\emph default 
 are described by a SVG document describing the arrow, line type and thickness.)
 Interactivity is achieved via scripting that are connected to each type.
 Grouping is done within SVG documents as well as applying stylesheets.
 However if SVG is to be used as styling only, grouping and applying stylesheets
 should probably be done at another level.
 
\layout Subsection

Use of javascripts (ECMA scripts)
\layout Standard

Interactivity is best defined in a procedural manner, however conditions
 and datastructures can be hard to access procedurally.
 (I.e.
 queries against RDF graphs need to follow complex and dynamic schemas such
 as Dublin Core.) As javascripts work closely together with DOM level 2 there
 is an event model which can be used for triggering popups and such, unfortunate
ly there is no keyevents until DOM level 3.
 
\layout Subsection

Using RDF as conceptmaps
\layout Standard

Extensionability and annotationability follows directly from the nature
 of RDF.
 As interactivity where solved on the level of types (See SVG section above)
 what remains is to create a schema supporting grouping and styling.
 It's preferrable to choose a design covering the 3D case as well.
 As grouping in 2D is closely related to the concept of scene graphs in
 3D there seem to be a natural choice of structure, let each grouping defines
 it's children and their transformations.
 See Appendix 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{schema}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Presenting conceptmaps
\layout Standard

Specific browser applications (e.g.
 Conzilla) will continue to be the most powerful way of viewing/browsing
 conceptmaps.
 To allow alternative views there is the question of which formats to use/export
 to and methods of embedding.
\layout Subsection

Export formats
\layout Standard

Exporting to other formats has the advantages of allowing a wider range
 of embeddings and the drawback of loosing flexibility.
 Hence exporting a webb of conceptmaps is hardly desirable since updates
 won't take effect immediately if at all.
 But this is hardly a problem if you consider 'on the fly' export, which
 is easily conceived in a server-client scenario.
 Possible image formats will include JPEG and PNG, both of rather poor quality
 compared with vector graphics alternatives such as SVG and PostScript.
 
\layout Subsection

Embedding possibilities
\layout Standard

The combination of RDF documents containing structured information, conceptmaps
 expressed in RDF and graphical rendering files in SVG isn't immediately
 possible to embedd into e.g.
 a regular webpages.
 There is several possible approaches to this:
\layout Enumerate

Export as images to formats mentioned above, can easily be embeded into
 webpages as well as into other documents.
\layout Enumerate

Static SVG can be embeded with help of plugins into browsers and other applicati
ons, this is just as any other image format only more complex to render.
\layout Enumerate

Dynamic SVG, i.e.
 adding scripts to controll some behaviour such as popups and mark, embedding
 is as for static SVG.
 As scripts only have access to the DOM all information needed has to be
 encoded into the document.
 
\layout Enumerate

Dynamic SVG with a java connection via liveconnect allows scripts to access
 information outside the DOM and do more complicated reasoning.
 Access to an enhanced RDF api with reasoning and query capabilities allows
 a lot more of intelligence in the presentation.
\layout Enumerate

Use sharp implementations such as Conzilla as a plugin or applet.
 This presupposes a slimmer Conzilla (or something similiar) with a good
 api, e.g.
 editing features are stripped.
\layout Subsection

Extending a viewer to become a browser
\layout Standard

With a browser we mean a viewer of conceptmaps with the possibility to browse,
 where browsing consists of at least three activities.
 
\emph on 
Surfing
\emph default 
 from one map to another, 
\emph on 
viewing
\emph default 
 content associated with parts of the map and finally to 
\emph on 
look at metadata
\emph default 
 for different parts of the map (parts of a map is anything that has an
 identity).
 Additionally the user has a preffered language and other 
\emph on 
state information
\emph default 
.
 With this definition the techniques 1 and 2 above won't qualify in a browser
 as they don't allow interactivity.
 Technique 5 above won't need any further discussion as there already exists
 a full fledged browser (Conzilla).
 Lets investigate the other alternatives from another perspective:
\layout Subsubsection

Client-server solution
\layout Standard

Alternative 3 above is well suited for this approach.
 RDF in XML format as an SVG foreign object would give access to the information
 via the DOM inteface.
 But this would need a regular RDF parser in javascript as the XML serialization
 isn't unique, so to simplify things we suggest a simpler RDF format.
 Still information can be contained in a nontrivial manner, e.g.
 some statements may have transitive semantic.
 Luckily, there is a javascript prolog engine with a RDF wrapper (also javascrip
t) that takes a simplified RDF syntax as input.
 (Still in experiment phase, developed by Dan Bricley)
\layout Description

Server: Server side javascript have access to databases and more.
 This will enable you to build up all information in a DOM (contining simplified
 RDF) that is easy to work with from a script perspective.
 By efficience reasons not all available information is always prefferable
 to deliver in one DOM at once (worst case is a huge portion of the semantic
 web).
 Hence some sort of hooks should be provided to enable reload when more
 information is needed.
\layout Description

Client: The state information has to be reflected into the document by the
 containing application or statically by the server side (on change a reload
 takes place).
 Javascripts will be triggered, parse data, make some simple inferences
 and react acordingly.
\layout Standard

If this approach with reasoning engine in javascript on clientside is to
 demanding there is other alternatives where more extensive communication
 with the server replaces complex scripts.
\layout Subsubsection

Stand alone browser
\layout Standard

Neccessary for a stand alone browser is possibilities for SVG rendering,
 scripting, RDF parsing, inference and some reasonable connection to a webbrowse
r allowing controll over the content view.
 Hence two alternatives appear, either reuse an existing (flexible enough)
 application (such as a webbrowser) or a sharp application written from
 scratch (reuse of existing libraries is ofcource encouraged).
\layout Description

Reuse\SpecialChar ~
application Mozilla is a a natural choice even if other applications
 such as Apaches SVG browser Batik could be possible.
 In mozilla support for SVG already exists in form of plugins, native support
 will probably soon appear.
 Inference engine in form of a wrapping of SWI-prolog via XPCom.
 RDF parser is a part of mozilla distribution already.
 Support for javascript is excellent via Rhino.
\layout Description

Rewrite\SpecialChar ~
application existing libraries of interest include SirPac(RDF-parser),
 Rhino(javascript) and JPL(prolog).
 Connections to good webbrowsers is done via operating systems specific
 channels maybe wrapped via Java Webstart or similiar or by integrating
 mozilla.
\layout Section
\start_of_appendix 
Standards of interest
\layout Subsection

SVG
\layout Standard

SVG is 2D graphics described in XML.
 It allows all of the techniques that comes with XML such as scripting and
 access to the document via DOM2 interfaces.
 The format allows reuse of components internally and via XLink from other
 XML documents.
 The strucutre is mainly a hierarchy of groupings similiar to the concept
 of a scene graph in 3D where at each level transformations can be applied.
 Additional information about the document can be put within the 
\emph on 
metadata
\emph default 
 tag (e.g.
 RDF can be put here) information about individual groupings are put within
 another tag called 
\emph on 
desc
\emph default 
, a 
\emph on 
title
\emph default 
 can also be provided.
 
\layout Subsubsection

Renderers implemented in java
\layout Description

BATIK is a static implementation that have script support but the changes
 in the DOM take no effect in the view.
 Nice feature: there is a SVGGraphics2D object that serilizes directly into
 
\emph on 
SVG
\emph default 
 instead of painting to a canvas.
 © Open source, Apache Software License 1.1.
 (???? 1.1)
\layout Description

SVG\SpecialChar ~
Toolkit is a smaller implementation with less predefined interfaces for
 extensions.
 It works with scripting, some features aren't implemented yet though.
 © Open source, CSIRO License.
 (based on Apache Software License 1.1.)
\layout Subsection

VRML
\layout Subsection

Javascript
\layout Standard

Comes in two flavours, client and server side.
 The client side is intended to work strictly against a DOM in a restricted
 environment such as a browser.
 The server side has more capabilities such as working against a database
 or filesystem.
 
\layout Subsubsection

Javascript engine in java
\layout Description

Rhino is developed within the mozilla project.
\layout Subsection

RDF
\layout Standard

Is a distributed graph a la web.
 You refer to resources with URIs and adds metadata in the form of typed
 properties.
 The type of a property is also a resource and therefore also something
 refferable (via a URI) and therefore possible to talk about via other typed
 properties.
 This system is powerfull enough to define itself in a fundemental selfreferrenc
ial loop.
 Schemas are built within the system and can be extended and reused as everythin
g are resources that can be reffered to externally.
 A basic schema called RDFS are defined for convenience and ease of use.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{schema}

\end_inset 

RDF Schema for Conceptmaps
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Include \verbatiminput{schema.rdf}

\end_inset 


\the_end
